Neurofibromatosis Remedies
May 01, 2017


Treatment of neurofibromatosis often varies; however, natural supplements and dietary changes are often the most effective, safest treatments available. Avoiding inflammatory and toxin-laden foods including milk, meat, caffeine and sugar is crucial for successfully treating the condition. Additionally, supplements including aloe vera and others help remove toxins from the body and eliminate tumors effectively.
What is Neurofibromatosis?
A genetic disorder, neurofibromatosis is a condition that targets the nervous system. Characterized by dark skin patches and tumors on the nerves, the condition ranges in severity. While the exact symptoms of the condition depend on the type, common symptoms include skin changes, bone deformities, hearing loss, ringing in the ears, poor balance and intense pain.

Natural Remedies for Tumors in the Nervous System
Treating tumors of the nervous system can be achieved by raising the alkalinity of the body as well as removing toxins. Natural supplements are effective treatment options and include such compounds as bee propolis, aloe vera and other supplements. Boosting the immune system by eating a balanced diet and staying active is another important component of a treatment regimen for neurofibromatosis.

Bee Propolis
Bee propolis is a natural compound crated by bees that has been found effective in treating neurofibromatosis. The compound contains a variety of anti-carcinogenic compounds that block and reverse the development of tumors. The compound is also rich in nutrients that boost the body’s immune system.

Aloe Vera
Aloe vera is another natural compound that is found within the aloe plant. The gel from within the aloe leaves is rich with immune boosting nutrients. Additionally, aloe attacks abnormal cells eliminating them from the body while leaving healthy cells intact.

Supplements
Regular dietary supplements are also effective for treating tumors. Vitamin C, E and B help reduce the size of and eliminate tumors. Colloidal silver is another anti-toxin compound that can treat tumors.

Neurofibromatosis is a genetic disorder that affects the nervous system and typically manifests as growths on the nerve cells. Natural treatments used consistently can eliminate tumors as well as the other symptoms of the condition and prevent the need for more invasive treatments.
