correspondencen engl j med 361;18 nejm.org october 29, 20091809than white patients but who have considerable ad-verse effects.2 However, low-dose peginterferon alfa-2b may also lead to a significantly higher rate of treatment discontinuation due to virologic non-response. Whether this result could be extrapolated to low-dose peginterferon alfa-2a therapy remains to be examined. Finally, several factors have been reported to affect early viral kinetic responses and relapse in patients infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV) genotype 1 who are receiving the current standard of care.3 Their roles in the low-dose peginterferon regimen remain unknown.Ching-Sheng Hsu, M.D.Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital Taipei, TaiwanJia-Horng Kao, M.D., Ph.D.National Taiwan University College of Medicine Taipei, Taiwan kaojh@ntu.edu.twMcHutchison JG, Lawitz EJ, Shiffman ML, et al. Peginter-1. feron alfa-2b or alfa-2a with ribavirin for treatment of hepatitis C infection. N Engl J Med 2009;361:580-93. [Erratum, N Engl J Med 2009;361:1027.]Liu CH, Liu CJ, Lin CL, et al. Pegylated interferon-alpha-2a 2. plus ribavirin for treatment-naive Asian patients with hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection: a multicenter, randomized controlled trial. Clin Infect Dis 2008;47:1260-9.Hsu CS, Liu CH, Liu CJ, et al. Factors affecting early viral 3. load decline of Asian chronic hepatitis C patients receiving pegy-lated interferon plus ribavirin therapy. Antivir Ther 2009;14:45-54.The Authors Reply: Hsu and Kao rightly point out that reported treatment response rates are higher among Asian patients with chronic HCV infection than among other patients. In the Indi-vidualized Dosing Efficacy vs. Flat Dosing to As-sess Optimal Pegylated Interferon Therapy (IDEAL) study, response rates among self-reported Asian patients were also high: 62% (13 of 21 patients) among patients who received peginterferon alfa-2b at a dose of 1.0 μg per kilogram of body weight per week, 70% (7 of 10 patients) among patients who received peginterferon alfa-2b at a dose of 1.5 μg per kilogram per week, and 50% (10 of 20 patients) among patients who received peginter-feron alfa-2a at a dose of 180 μg per week. Re-cently, the response to treatment for HCV infec-tion has been strongly associated with a genetic interleukin-28B variant that resides on chromo-some 19. The “favorable” allele is more prevalent in East Asian populations1; this may, in part, ex-plain the favorable response observed in this pa-tient group. We also agree that a low dose of peginterferon alfa-2b was well tolerated and associated with a similar overall efficacy in our study, but not in all subpopulations. Similar findings have been re-ported with peginterferon alfa-2b monotherapy (at a dose of 135 μg weekly)2 and peginterferon alfa-2a monotherapy (at a dose of 180 μg weekly).3 Janice Albrecht, Ph.D.Schering-Plough Research Institute Kenilworth, NJJohn McHutchison, M.D.Duke University Durham, NC mchut001@mc.duke.eduMark Sulkowski, M.D.Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MDGe D, Fellay J, Thompson AJ, et al.  Genetic variation in IL28B 1. predicts hepatitis C treatment-induced viral clearance. Nature 2009;461:399-401.Pockros PJ, Carithers R, Desmond P, et al.  Efficacy and safety 2. of two-dose regimens of peginterferon alpha-2a compared with interferon alpha-2a in chronic hepatitis C: a multicenter, random-ized controlled trial. Am J Gastroenterol 2004;99:1298-305.Lindsay KL, Trepo C, Heintges T, et al.  A randomized, dou-3. ble-blind trial comparing pegylated interferon alfa-2b to inter-feron alfa-2b as initial treatment for chronic hepatitis C. Hepa-tology 2001;34:395-403.Hearing Improvement after Bevacizumab  for Neurofibromatosis Type 2To the Editor: Plotkin et al. (July 23 issue)1 re-port a sustained tumor-volume reduction in 4 of 10 patients and a hearing response in 4 of 10 pa-tients with neurofibromatosis type 2 after beva-cizumab treatment. The authors’ conclusion that tumor shrinkage and hearing improvement are effects of bevacizumab treatment is not convinc-ing, because the study did not involve a control group. Shrinkage of a vestibular schwannoma, especially in cystic tumors in patients with neuro-fibromatosis type 2, can also occur during an ob-servation period without any treatment.2 In addi-tion, some patients who have been assigned to wait-and-scan observation show hearing improve-ment over time without any treatment.3 The non-blinded design of the study might have biased the investigators and patients during the hearing tests. Otherwise, how do Plotkin et al. explain the poor The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org on June 25, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2009 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. The new england journal of medicinen engl j med 361;18 nejm.org october 29, 20091810correlation between tumor-volume shrinkage and hearing improvement? Also, how do they explain the poor correlation between pure-tone thresholds and word-recognition results? Instead of only us-ing subjective acoustic hearing tests, it would have been worthwhile to use objective test methods such as brain-stem auditory evoked response.Orlando Guntinas-Lichius, M.D.Friedrich Schiller University of Jena Jena, Germany orlando.guntinas@med.uni-jena.dePlotkin SR, Stemmer-Rachamimov AO, Barker FG II, et al. 1. Hearing improvement after bevacizumab in patients with neuro-fibromatosis type 2. N Engl J Med 2009;361:358-67.Stangerup SE, Caye-Thomasen P, Tos M, Thomsen J. The 2. natural history of vestibular schwannoma. Otol Neurotol 2006; 27:547-52.Idem.3.  Change in hearing during ‘wait and scan’ management of patients with vestibular schwannoma. J Laryngol Otol 2008; 122:673-81.To the Editor: Plotkin et al. report that vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) blockade with bevacizumab improved hearing and decreased the volume of vestibular schwannomas in some pa-tients with neurofibromatosis type 2. Dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging data indicated that bevacizumab normalized the function of tumor vessels. We wonder whether vascular normalization is the real or unique mechanism of anti-VEGF therapy for vestibular schwannomas. In some clinical trials, vascular normalization might provide benefit by killing tu-mor cells in synergy with chemotherapy; this is accomplished by improving the delivery of cyto-toxic agents to tumors. However, in this study, 10 patients received bevacizumab as monotherapy. Otherwise, VEGF inhibition might have had direct cytotoxic effects on tumor cells that express VEGF receptors and that depend on VEGF for survival.1,2 The authors and other groups have detected VEGF and its receptors in schwannomas, and increased levels of these factors correlate with increased rates of tumor growth.3,4 Therefore, it is not known whether the curative effect is due to the direct kill-ing of tumor cells and increase in apoptosis by bevacizumab or to vascular normalization. Jian-Sheng Diao, M.D. Wen-Sen Xia, M.D. Shu-Zhong Guo, M.D.Fourth Military Medical University Xi’an, ChinaWey JS, Fan F, Gray MJ, et al. Vascular endothelial growth 1. factor receptor-1 promotes migration and invasion in pancreatic carcinoma cell lines. Cancer 2005;104:427-38.Fan F, Wey JS, McCarty MF, et al. Expression and function of 2. vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 on human colorec-tal cancer cells. Oncogene 2005;24:2647-53.Caye-Thomasen P, Baandrup L, Jacobsen GK, Thomsen J, 3. Stangerup SE. Immunohistochemical demonstration of vascular endothelial growth factor in vestibular schwannomas correlates to tumor growth rate. Laryngoscope 2003;113:2129-34.Caye-Thomasen P, Werther K, Nalla A, et al. VEGF and VEGF 4. receptor-1 concentration in vestibular schwannoma homoge-nates correlates to tumor growth rate. Otol Neurotol 2005;26:98-101.The Authors Reply: Guntinas-Lichius raises an important issue about trial design in studies of vestibular schwannomas. Recently, a group of ex-perts endorsed the objective radiographic response rate as the appropriate choice for initial single-group drug trials because the rates of spontaneous tumor shrinkage in untreated vestibular schwan-nomas are low.1 In the study cited by Guntinas-Lichius,2 extremely few tumors decreased in size during the observation period (0.9%), whereas the majority of tumors were either stable (70.2%) or increased in size (28.9%). In our study, 60% of tumors had a radiographic response; this rate far exceeded the rate of spontaneous tumor shrink-age. Moreover, the median annual growth rate of the tumors before bevacizumab therapy was 63%, whereas many of the tumors in the previous study were not growing at baseline. In a companion study3 to the study cited by Guntinas-Lichius, the rate of spontaneous hearing improvement with-out treatment was 2.7%, which is far lower than the reported rate of hearing improvement in our study (57%). Together, these findings provide strong evidence that changes in tumor size and hearing after treatment were related to the effects of bevacizumab.We do not fully understand why word recogni-tion improved more than detection of pure tones. However, we disagree with the assertions that the hearing measurements were subjective and that bias may explain the findings. Standardized methods exist for the determination of pure-tone averages and measurement of word recognition. In hearing loss due to vestibular schwannomas, word recognition typically is affected more than the detection of pure tones.1 Thus, greater im-provement might be expected in word recognition than in the ability to hear pure tones after effec-tive treatment of vestibular schwannomas. Al-though brain-stem auditory evoked response mea-surements would have been worthwhile, we did not include them because we did not have suffi-cient data for comparisons among patients.The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org on June 25, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2009 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. correspondencen engl j med 361;18 nejm.org october 29, 20091811We agree with Diao et al. that inhibiting VEGF in vestibular schwannomas probably affects both the vasculature and tumor cells. Our data do not permit us to estimate the relative contributions of vascular permeability and direct killing of tumor cells to clinical response. However, these two pro-cesses might explain why the effect of bevacizu-mab on tumor size and hearing was not tightly correlated. Scott R. Plotkin, M.D., Ph.D.Massachusetts General Hospital Boston, MA splotkin@partners.orgChris Halpin, Ph.D.Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary Boston, MAEmmanuelle di Tomaso, Ph.D.Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research Cambridge, MASince publication of the article, Dr. di Tomaso reports being employed by the Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research. No other potential conflict of interest relevant to this letter was re-ported.Plotkin SR, Halpin C, Blakeley JO, et al. Suggested response 1. criteria for phase II antitumor drug studies for neurofibromato-sis type 2 related vestibular schwannoma. J Neurooncol 2009; 93:61-77.Stangerup SE, Caye-Thomasen P, Tos M, Thomsen J. The 2. natural history of vestibular schwannoma. Otol Neurotol 2006; 27:547-52.Idem.3.  Change in hearing during ‘wait and scan’ management of patients with vestibular schwannoma. J Laryngol Otol 2008; 122:673-81.Death in a Gene-Therapy TrialTo the Editor: Frank et al. (July 9 issue)1 do not discuss the issue of therapeutic misconception2 — namely, the belief by a research subject that the investigational agent is actually therapeutic. Admittedly, there was no concrete evidence for this issue here, but on the basis of the nature and timing of events, the issue was relevant and be-came an important part of the report and recom-mendations of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes of Health.Therapeutic misconception for the subject can be addressed during the consenting procedure.3,4 However, therapeutic misconception is also an issue for investigators for whom conflicting com-mitments can blur the line between research and treatment. Therefore, the protocol itself becomes the main protection for safety in this regard. In addition to recommending screening tests and laboratory requirements before the initiation of therapy, the advisory committee recommended that subjects carry a medical card containing key information about the investigational agent, as well as phone numbers for ready contact with the study’s principal investigator. The protocol should clearly state how to proceed in the event of any unforeseen illness.John A. Zaia, M.D.City of Hope Duarte, CA jzaia@bricoh.eduHoward J. Federoff, M.D., Ph.D.Georgetown University Medical Center Washington, DCDr. Zaia reports being a member, and Dr. Federoff reports being chair, of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which reviewed this adverse event. No other potential conflict of interest relevant to this letter was reported.Frank KM, Hogarth DK, Miller JL, et al. Investigation of the 1. cause of death in a gene-therapy trial. N Engl J Med 2009;361: 161-9.King NM, Henderson GE, Churchill LR, et al. Consent forms 2. and the therapeutic misconception: the example of gene transfer research. IRB 2005;27:1-8.Kahn J. Informed consent in human gene transfer clinical 3. trials. Hum Gene Ther 2008;19:7-8.National Institutes of Health, Office of Biotechnology Ac-4. tivities. NIH guidance on informed consent for gene transfer research. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health. (Accessed October 8, 2009, at http://oba.od.nih.gov/oba/rac/ic/pdfs/temp_pdf.pdf.)To the Editor: Frank et al. examined the role of a tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) antagonist, delivered through an adeno-associated virus, as a precipitating cause of death in a gene-therapy tri-al. When a patient is receiving a TNF-α blocker, education about the risk of opportunistic infec-tion, especially histoplasmosis and tuberculosis, is a requisite. A survey of infectious-disease con-sultants in the United States revealed that histo-plasmosis occurred more often than tuberculosis in patients receiving TNF-α blockers.1 Perhaps because of the regional occurrence of histoplas-mosis in the United States, many physicians may fail to entertain the diagnosis of this infection. Since the presenting clinical features are nonspe-cific and exposure often goes unrecognized, phy-sicians should include histoplasmosis in such evaluations. The role of reactivation of latent in-The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org on June 25, 2017. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2009 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 